A short subjective roundup of the first day of the 50th Moers Festival:

1. La Tène
I still had some work to do, but switched the live stream on right when the festival started. My attention was split, this first concert was passing by. Drones created with bagpipes, harmoniums and hurdy-gurdys and some Krautrock rhythms added. Neither uninteresting nor outstanding. Grace didn't like it, she found it "too messy".

2. Große Kleine Allee Band
For 15 years the Moers Festival offers a grant called "Improviser in Residence", whose duties are to occasionally reside and publically perform throughout the whole year in that little town. One of the former residents, Sanne van Hek, has died very prematurely. All the other 14 past improvisers in residence gathered together here on a free improv session. All of them knew how to take a pause, so there is a great variety in intensity, dynamics, re-combination of players, etc. A solid session.

3. Joëlle Léandre & Gerald Cleaver
The first highlight of the day. Joëlle Léandre returns to the festival after 34 years of absence from it. She still plays her remarkable bass idiom as fluently as ever. It is so much fun to see how she produces her sounds, not only to hear them. (And there was a problem with the filming of this gig: The cameras were too much distracted by the funny performance artists in front of the stage.. I would have liked to see more focus on the musicians.)

4. Brad Mehldau
As expected the most conventional music of the day. With one exception Mehldau played covers of other people's music, mostly Radiohead, Beatles, and John Coltrane. I particularly liked his rendition of "I Am the Walrus". On the whole not the type of music I woudl initiatively run for, but in the overall context of the musical stream: Nice

5. Will Guthrie & Nist-Nah
I don't have an aesthetical scale for evaluating this music. It's "modern compositions for Gamelan ensemble". The rhythms of the first piece were very catchy. For the rest I am just not so sure.

6. Decoy with Joe McPhee
Joe McPhee is still a very straight and strong man at 85. Though the website announced he'll play alto sax and pocket-trumpet, he went with a tenor throughout, and sang some lines about John Coltrane. Great accompaniment behind him: John Edwards showing off his versatility, from traditional walking bass via bowing to extended noise making, Hamid Drake laying out a solid rhythmic groove. Alexander Hawkins on hammond was fun to watch: A very extroverted style of playing, using not only hands but everything up to his elbows. Great gig, showing how effective that old hammond sound can still be today.

7. Lubomyr Melnyk
Melnyk is not the type of person to just shutup and play. He is a missionary, promoting his idea of "continuous music" not just by letting the music speak for itself, but by talking a lot about it. I had never heard of him before, so to hear him talk of the philosophical backgrounds in a short talk, delivered an hour before his actual gig, was interesting. The music itself is truly interesting. It has an "easy-listening" surface, a truly continuousness in its flow, and enough depth below the surface to reward close listening.

8. Julien Desprez
They spared the absolute highlight of the evening to the last gig. What a force of nature! A very idiosyncratic way of playing the electric guitar. I was stunned.